---
layout: archive
permalink: /group/
title: "MINT Group"
redirect_from: 
  - /group
  - /group.html
  - /MINT
---
The Middlebury Ice Numerical modelling Team (MINT) includes student research assistants
and Middlebury seniors working on research theses -- plus some Friends of MINT at other
institutions.  Join us!

## Current MINT members

**Finn Wimberly** (Physics '24) has worked as a MINT research assistant since Fall 2022. 
He analyzes glacial runoff output from different global glacier models to determine how 
the unique features of each glacier model affect 21st-century projections across scales, 
from single glacier retreat to large Alpine river basins runoff.  Finn's work involves 
processing large datasets in Python. Thanks to a remote connection to the lab computer, 
he can do this work from anywhere! When he is not coding, Finn is an avid outdoorsman.

**Aiden Pape** (Computer Science '25) joins MINT as a research assistant for Spring 2024.
Aiden will develop and document open-source software for multi-variate statistical analysis
of glaciological observations.



## Past MINT members
**Evelyn Sorensen** (Earth & Climate '25) was a MINT research assistant for Summer 2023.
She worked on glacier model development, testing a new method for simulating iceberg 
calving in the Ice sheet and Sea-level System Model (ISSM).  Evelyn passed away in 
September 2023. MINT mourns the loss of our brilliant, cherished group member.


**Molly Arndt** (Earth & Climate '23) completed a B.Sc. thesis on climate-model-derived 
uncertainties in future glacial water resources at city scale.  She simulated glacial runoff
to La Paz, Bolivia, through the end of the 21st century using the Open Global Glacier Model
forced by 10 global climate models.  You can read her thesis via her 
[Zenodo archive](https://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7946884).  As of September 2023, Molly
will be a hydrologist with the US National Parks Service through its Scientists in Parks
program.

**Mikayla Pascual** (Earth & Climate '22) completed a B.Sc. thesis on the role of sediment
dynamics in modulating ice sheet advance and retreat. In her own words:
> I grew up in Los Angeles, and I never thought much about glaciers or ice sheets, 
but I was curious about how anthropogenic effects change the Earth. Science solutions 
to combat climate change were fascinating to me and fueled my passion for learning. 
When I took an oceanography class during my undergrad at Middlebury, I learned that 
geological tools could help solve my scientific pursuits. I was introduced to glaciology 
through an NSF REU experience with the Georgia Tech Ice & Climate group. There I learned 
about the beauty of glaciers and how earth system models are used to understand the 
changing ice sheets. This work transformed into my senior thesis where I was advised by 
Dr. Lizz Ultee. I am currently a PhD student at the University of Texas at Austin with 
affiliations at the Jackson School of Geosciences and Institute for Geophysics. I am 
co-advised by Drs. Ginny Catania and Benjamin Keisling, and together we work on 
understanding glacial sedimentation at outlet glaciers in Greenland through a 
coupled ice-sediment model. I am also interested in how seasonal glacier dynamics 
impact model projections.

**SG Solomon** (Earth & Climate '24) was a research assistant during the Fall 2022 and 
Winter 2023 terms.  SG compiled output from the Python Glacier Evolution Model (PyGEM)
to make presentation-quality figures describing future glacial runoff under various
climate scenarios.

**Jiaqi Li** (Earth & Climate and Computer Science '22) conducted a semester of independent
research using the Open Global Glacier Model to simulate future changes to Olivares Alfa
Glacier, Chile.  Jiaqi is now a software engineer.

**Siena Caddle** (Film '22) conducted two semesters of independent research, analysing 
projections of Greenland Ice Sheet outlet glacier retreat generated by Prof. Ultee's 
model, [SERMeQ](https://github.com/ehultee/sermeq).



## Friends of MINT
We collaborate actively with groups at several institutions worldwide, both through funded
projects and through mutual interest.  Do you think you should be listed as a Friend of MINT?
You're probably right - we love friends.  Drop us a line!

- [**Amy Jenson**](https://www.gi.alaska.edu/news/geophysical-institute-announces-2022-schaible-fellowship-recipients) 
(University of Alaska Fairbanks) is a PhD student working on disentangling
meltwater-driven and terminus-driven dynamics of Greenland outlet glaciers.  Amy's primary 
advisor is Martin Truffer (UAF); Lizz sits on her dissertation committee.
- [**Ruitang Yang**](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=P7UUU4kAAAAJ&hl=en) 
(University of Oslo, Norway) is a postdoctoral scholar working on 
implementing [SERMeQ-style frontal ablation](https://github.com/ehultee/sermeq-fa) into
global glacier models.  Ruitang works directly with Regine Hock (UiO); Lizz supports her work
on theory and code implementation of frontal ablation.
- [**Jan-Hendrik Malles**](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=pQ8FhHkAAAAJ&hl=en) 
(University of Bremen) is a PhD candidate working on ice-ocean interaction in the Open 
Global Glacier Model.  Jan's primary advisor is Ben Marzeion (Bremen); Lizz has 
collaborated with Jan to support his [paper](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-glaciology/article/exploring-the-impact-of-a-frontal-ablation-parameterization-on-projected-21stcentury-mass-change-for-northern-hemisphere-glaciers/1ABFB1057B58B2CC42B0FEE33F346C3F) 
about 21st-century mass change of marine-terminating glaciers.