---
title: "Glacial runoff buffers droughts through the 21st century"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2022-gSPEI
excerpt: 'To what extent can we expect that retreating glaciers will continue to moderate droughts around the world?'
date: 2022-06-01
venue: 'Earth System Dynamics'
paperurl: 'http://ehultee.github.io/files/gSPEI-esd-13-935-2022.pdf'
citation: 'Ultee, L., Coats, S., and Mackay, J. (2022). &quot;Glacial runoff buffers droughts through the 21st century.&quot; <i>Earth System Dynamics</i> 13: 935-959. https://doi.org/10.5194/esd-13-935-2022'
---

Global climate model projections suggest that 21st century climate change will bring 
significant drying in the terrestrial midlatitudes. Recent glacier modeling suggests that 
runoff from glaciers will continue to provide substantial freshwater in many drainage 
basins, though the supply will generally diminish throughout the century. In the absence 
of dynamic glacier ice within global climate models (GCMs), a comprehensive picture of 
future hydrological drought conditions in glaciated regions has been elusive. Here, we 
leverage the results of existing GCM simulations and a global glacier model to evaluate 
glacial buffering of droughts in the Standardized Precipitation-Evapotranspiration Index 
(SPEI). We compute one baseline version of the SPEI and one version modified to account 
for glacial runoff changing over time, and we compare the two for each of 56 large-scale 
glaciated basins worldwide. We find that accounting for glacial runoff tends to increase 
the multi-model ensemble mean SPEI and reduce drought frequency and severity, even in 
basins with relatively little (<2 %) glacier cover. When glacial runoff is included in 
the SPEI, the number of droughts is reduced in 40 of 56 basins and the average drought 
severity is reduced in 53 of 56 basins, with similar counts in each time period we study. 
Glacial drought buffering persists even as glacial runoff is projected to decline through 
the 21st century. Results are similar under representative concentration pathway (RCP) 
4.5 and 8.5 emissions scenarios, though results for the higher-emissions RCP 8.5 scenario 
show wider multi-model spread (uncertainty) and greater incidence of decreasing buffering 
later in the century. A k-means clustering analysis shows that glacial drought buffering 
is strongest in moderately glaciated, arid basins.



Download paper <a href='http://ehultee.github.io/files/gSPEI-esd-13-935-2022.pdf'>here</a>.