---
title: "The Stochastic Ice-Sheet and Sea-Level System Model v1.0 (StISSM v1.0)"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2022-StISSM
excerpt: 'Adding stochastic forcing options to ISSM to facilitate large-ensemble simulations'
date: 2022-11-02
venue: 'Geoscientific Model Development'
paperurl: 'https://gmd.copernicus.org/articles/15/8269/2022/'
citation: 'Verjans, V., Robel, A., Seroussi, H., Ultee, L., and Thompson, A. (2022). &quot;The Stochastic Ice-Sheet and Sea-Level System Model v1.0 (StISSM v1.0).&quot; <i>Geoscientific Model Development</i>'
---

We introduce the first version of the Stochastic Ice-sheet and Sea-level System Model 
(StISSM v1.0), which adds stochastic parameterizations within a state-of-the-art 
large-scale ice sheet model. In StISSM v1.0, stochastic parameterizations target climatic 
fields with internal variability, as well as glaciological processes exhibiting 
variability that cannot be resolved at the spatiotemporal resolution of ice sheet models: 
calving and subglacial hydrology. Because both climate and unresolved glaciological 
processes include internal variability, stochastic parameterizations allow StISSM v1.0 to 
account for the impacts of their high-frequency variability on ice dynamics, and on the 
long-term evolution of modeled glaciers and ice sheets. StISSM v1.0 additionally includes 
statistical models to represent surface mass balance and oceanic forcing as autoregressive 
processes. Such models, once appropriately calibrated, allow users to sample irreducible 
uncertainty in climate prediction without the need of computationally expensive ensembles 
from climate models. When combined together, these novel features of StISSM v1.0 enable 
quantification of irreducible uncertainty in ice sheet model simulations, and of ice sheet 
sensitivity to noisy forcings. We detail the implementation strategy of StISSM v1.0, 
evaluate its capabilities in idealized model experiments, demonstrate its applicability at 
the scale of a Greenland ice sheet simulation, and highlight priorities for future 
developments. Results from our test experiments demonstrate the complexity of ice sheet 
response to variability, such as asymmetric and/or non-zero mean responses to symmetric, 
zero-mean imposed variability. They also show differing levels of projection uncertainty 
for stochastic variability in different processes. These features are in line with results 
from stochastic experiments in climate and ocean models, as well as with the theoretical 
expected behavior of noise-forced non-linear systems.


Download paper <a href=https://gmd.copernicus.org/articles/15/8269/2022/'>here</a>.