---
title: "Exploring the impact of a frontal ablation parameterization on projected 21st-century mass change for Northern Hemisphere glaciers"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2023-Malles-etal
excerpt: 'Excluding frontal ablation can skew future projections of glacier change'
date: 2023-04-17
venue: 'Journal of Glaciology'
paperurl: 'https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-glaciology/article/exploring-the-impact-of-a-frontal-ablation-parameterization-on-projected-21stcentury-mass-change-for-northern-hemisphere-glaciers/1ABFB1057B58B2CC42B0FEE33F346C3F'
citation: 'Malles, J.-H. et al. (2023). &quot;Exploring the impact of a frontal ablation parameterization on projected 21st-century mass change for Northern Hemisphere glaciers.&quot; <i>Journal of Glaciology</i> 69(277), pp. 1317–1332. doi:10.1017/jog.2023.19.'
---

Marine-terminating glaciers cover more than one-fourth of the total glacierized area in the 
Northern Hemisphere outside the Greenland ice sheet. It is therefore crucial to ensure an 
adequate representation of these glaciers when projecting large-scale glacier mass changes. 
We investigate how the introduction of marine frontal processes in the modeling chain 
influences the results of mass change projections, compared to projections neglecting such 
processes. We find that including frontal processes reduces the projected glacier mass loss, 
since incorporating frontal ablation in the model's mass-balance calibration results in a 
decrease in marine-terminating glaciers’ sensitivity to atmospheric temperatures. We also 
find that retrograde bed slopes lead to increased frontal ablation as the atmosphere warms, 
while frontal ablation decreases if bed slopes are prograde. These opposing effects have 
the potential to partly cancel each other when considering large glacier ensembles. 
Although we do not account for potential future changes in oceanic climate yet, any effect 
of these would be moderated by around half of today's marine-terminating glaciers becoming 
land-terminating in the course of the 21st century. While we find a significant influence 
of ice flow parameters on our results, boundary conditions remain the largest source of 
uncertainty in our projections.


Download paper <a href='https://doi.org/10.1017/jog.2023.19'>here</a>.