---
title: "Short- and long-term variability of the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-NREE-variability
excerpt: 'Drivers of ice sheet variability across multiple time scales'
date: 2024-02-08
venue: 'Nature Reviews Earth & Environment'
<!-- paperurl: 'https://www.nature.com/articles/s43017-023-00509-7.epdf?sharing_token=EJZ02zq3kFQO4XKwZVTBLdRgN0jAjWel9jnR3ZoTv0NlXBkse_V2fGVmyGVwGFcXe8LM4zjSaytnzbxkpU3vleMHbbCbjypxjcJ3p1wJddVoe1nKU4klsbQfMwCvE-m9plem7c8GygdxBfIr9KNkFEXV23v6oF28LZQkvsWpQm4%3D' -->
citation: 'Hanna, E. et al (2024). &quot;Short- and long-term variability of the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets.&quot; <i>Nat. Rev. Earth & Environment</i> 5, 193-210. doi:10.1038/s43017-023-00509-7.'
---

The variability of the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets occurs on various timescales and 
is important for projections of sea level rise; however, there are substantial 
uncertainties concerning future ice-sheet mass changes. In this Review, we explore the 
degree to which short-term fluctuations and extreme glaciological events reflect the ice 
sheets’ long-term evolution and response to ongoing climate change. Short-term (decadal or 
shorter) variations in atmospheric or oceanic conditions can trigger amplifying feedbacks 
that increase the sensitivity of ice sheets to climate change. For example, variability in 
ocean-induced and atmosphere-induced melting can trigger ice thinning, retreat and/or 
collapse of ice shelves, grounding-line retreat, and ice flow acceleration. The Antarctic 
Ice Sheet is especially prone to increased melting and ice sheet collapse from warm ocean 
currents, which could be accentuated with increased climate variability. In Greenland both 
high and low melt anomalies have been observed since 2012, highlighting the influence of 
increased interannual climate variability on extreme glaciological events and ice sheet 
evolution. Failing to adequately account for such variability can result in biased 
projections of multi-decadal ice mass loss. Therefore, future research should aim to 
improve climate and ocean observations and models, and develop sophisticated ice sheet 
models that are directly constrained by observational records and can capture ice 
dynamical changes across various timescales.


Download paper <a href='https://ehultee.github.io/files/Hanna-NREE-Short_and_long_term_var-2024.pdf'>here</a>.