---
title: "A stochastic parameterization of ice sheet surface mass balance for the Stochastic Ice-Sheet and Sea-Level System Model (StISSM v1.0)"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-StISP-SMB
excerpt: 'Developing a stochastic ice sheet mass-balance scheme'
date: 2024-02-08
venue: 'Geoscientific Model Development'
paperurl: 'https://gmd.copernicus.org/articles/17/1041/2024/'
citation: 'Ultee, L., Robel, A. A., and Castruccio, S. (2024). &quot;A stochastic parameterization of ice sheet surface mass balance for the Stochastic Ice-Sheet and Sea-Level System Model (StISSM v1.0).&quot; <i>Geoscientific Model Development</i> 17, 1041-1057. doi:10.5194/gmd-17-1041-2024.'
---

Many scientific and societal questions that draw on ice sheet modeling necessitate 
sampling a wide range of potential climatic changes and realizations of internal climate 
variability. For example, coastal planning literature demonstrates a demand for 
probabilistic sea level projections with quantified uncertainty. Further, robust 
attribution of past and future ice sheet change to specific processes or forcings requires 
a full understanding of the space of possible ice sheet behaviors. The wide sampling 
required to address such questions is computationally infeasible with sophisticated 
numerical climate models at the resolution required to accurately force ice sheet models. 
Stochastic generation of climate forcing of ice sheets offers a complementary alternative. 
Here, we describe a method to construct a stochastic generator for ice sheet surface mass 
balance varying in time and space. We demonstrate the method with an application to 
Greenland Ice Sheet surface mass balance for 1980–2012. We account for spatial correlations 
among glacier catchments using sparse covariance techniques, and we apply an 
elevation-dependent downscaling to recover gridded surface mass balance fields suitable for 
forcing an ice sheet model while including feedback from changing ice sheet surface 
elevation. The efficiency gained in the stochastic method supports large-ensemble 
simulations of ice sheet change in a new stochastic ice sheet model. We provide open 
source Python workflows to support use of our stochastic approach for a broad range of 
applications.


Download paper <a href='https://gmd.copernicus.org/articles/17/1041/2024/'>here</a>.